---
layout: post
section-type: post
title: "WFYS 2017: Tales of an Inspired Participant"
category: Events
tags: [ 'wfys2017', 'world-youth', 'social-events' ]
---

Right from childhood, I always loved Engineering stuff, in fact most of my siblings do- yes, 
I have quite a handful of them, nice fellows they are. I once had a dream of becoming a researcher and spending my whole life in the lab. 
Growing up in Nigeria, people take Medicine and Law as the most prestigious courses; any other thing can only be a second option.
Engineering was also popular but was not considered prestigious. 
I remember my dad always wanted me to become a doctor - who knows, it might still be in his list of wants. 
I however chose the rough road of the Engineering discipline and landed my self a huge interest in computers. 

My interest led me to taking a course in Computer science in the university. I always tell new friends that 
all IT guys are introverts, they just stay in front of their PC's all day. It is their work, their study and
their fun. Naturally, I was one of them.

I always frowned at social forums and invents that had no flavour of tech in it. Always considered them a waste of time.
However, in Summer 2016, I was convinced by a friend to attend the <a href="http://www.campus4youth.com" target="\_blank">RANEPA Summer Campus</a>.
From there, something changed. It was the first big non-IT forum I attended and was really impressed. I made a lot of new friends, met
many great people - it was a big wow!

So, when I saw the adverts about <a href="http://russia2017.com//" target="\_blank">WFYS 2017<a/>, I did not think twice - I wanted to be part of such a big event.
Currently living in Russia, it was easier for me to attend the Event as part of the delegation from the Region I live - Tatarstan, 
than attending as a Nigerian delegate. I registered in the site, went to interviews and an orientation session and boom! - I was ready to go and see the exquisite landscapes of Sochi and the Black Sea!
  
The journey from Kazan to Sochi took 48 hours by train - yes, this is Russia baby!
I did not feel the passing of time though, as we went together as a delegation of about 200 participants. 
We played, got to know each other, ate and played again. Having plans to travel around Russia by train? Go with a big company and thank me later :smile:

The Festival was to take place in the Sochi Olympic Park in the Adler district of the city, where the Winter Olympics of 2014 was held.
Arriving at the train station, we received a warm welcome and got picked up by the volunteers - bless those guys - and taken by bus to the Park.
The first day was not very eventful as the festival hadn't officially started yet. As we were waiting to be checked into our hotel, some people used the opportunity
to check out the beach side of - yeah, The Great Black Sea!

The next day was however different. During the day, we were in the Main Media Center(MMC) where most of the lectures took place. While walking to the MMC from the hotel in the morning,
we got the chance to see the beautiful streets and buildings of the Olympic Park. It's a whole city with a peculiar architecture.
Each individual building had its architectural presence different from the others. From magnificent Bolshoi Ice Dome to the stylistic MMC - Everything was a great site to behold. From the Park, 
you could also see in the distance, the hills and valleys of the Caucasus Mountains rising to the horizon with the tops clothed in snow . 
Later in the evening that day, the Opening Ceremony was held. The Ice Dome couldn't hold all the participants, so not everyone had the opportunity to
attend it - including me, unfortunately. Nevertheless, a huge and interesting concert with popular Russian bands was held at the Main Stage of the park for those who couldn't make it, so it was not a complete miss out.

Throughout the Festival, there were lots of great lectures and the interior of the MMC was a great sight to behold. At each point in time, it held more than 10,000 people 
of different cultures, countries and backgrounds. But yet, you could see people intermingling with each and it seemed like they had known each other for eternity. 
Each country had a stand where they displayed elements of the culture and national pride. Each time you would see different crowds gathered in different corners listening, playing and 
dancing to different tunes of cultural music. It was an opportunity for people to showcase the beauty of their nationalities and this opportunity I must say, was nicely utilized by most.
